---
layout: post
title: Tour du Mont Blanc with a Twist - Umbrellas, Thunderstorms, and Wolves
tags: hiking
image_preview: /assets/images/TMB/18.jpg
image_heading: /assets/images/TMB/20.jpg
---

Hiking Tour du Mont Blanc (TMB) has been on my list for quite some time, but it was worth waiting to do it because when I finally decided to hike it, I had one of the craziest and most unexpected encounters with wild animals - I saw a wild wolf! And so what the TMB is? The trail is a closed loop going around Mont Blanc and it has many variants. The main one is about 160 km long with about 10 000 meters of positive elevation gain, passing through three countries - France, Italy and Switzerland. I originally wanted to hike it with minimum things, so I was thunking about going hut-to-hut, but I quickly realised that this will be tricky because huts are hopelesly booked out. So I And so having more than enough of relevant hiking experience from the New Zealand, I decided to hike with my tarp insted.


## Starting in Chamonix

I decided to start on September 2, 2025. The reason was simple - it wasn't too hot anymore, it was past UTMB weekend, so Chamonix valley wasn't too busy anymore, and the weather for the next four days looked reasonably good - some rain but not most of the time. Even though the Tour du Mont Blanc officially starts in Les Houches, I wanted to start in Chamonix because the town has its magic which I like.

I got to Chamonix by the first possible train at about 9 a.m. I bought second breakfast and without too much waiting, I set on the journey, following the counterclockwise direction of the loop. I continued on the easy gravel path and road to Les Houches which marks the start of the trail for most of the people walking the trail. Right after the village trail starts going up to the first climb to Col de Voza where I got my first rain shower of the day (luckily also the last one). 

Hiking alone left me plenty of time to watch gear trends. Usually I look at shoes or backpacks, but this time umbrellas stole the show. At first I couldn’t take it seriously: in a mountain storm, an umbrella is either a Mary Poppins ticket to flight or a DIY lightning rod. But the more I saw them — strapped to packs or proudly carried — the more I wondered if I was missing a genius idea.  I have to say that I still hadn’t cracked the umbrella mystery even after the four days on the trail.

After Col de Voza, I made a detour from the TMB IP (IP = Itinéraire Principal - the main route in french) and headed to one of detours to Col de Tricot where I started meeting crowds of people going the same direction like me. After that I descended to Les Contamines where I bought some snack because the next shop was supposed to be 50 km further in Courmayer in Italy. I carried food but it is always nice to go to the shop and buy whatever I want and not be restricted by the selection that my backpack offers.

{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/44.jpg, Cloudy view from Col de Tricot.;
			/assets/images/TMB/48.jpeg, Watching the gear people are wearing makes me sometimes wonder...Is that really a 🍆??! ;
			/assets/images/TMB/43.jpg, Col de Tricot.;
			/assets/images/TMB/41.jpg, Tent village above Les Contamines.;
			/assets/images/TMB/39.jpg, Climbing to Col de la Croix du Bonhomme.;
			/assets/images/TMB/38.jpg, Close to the Col de la Croix du Bonhomme.;
			/assets/images/TMB/35.jpg, After passing the highest point on the whole trail. The sky clear up and I could see the first view of massiv of Mont Blanc.
			"%}

Full of energy after the quick refreshment in the supermarket in Les Contamines, I started a long climb to Col de la Croix du Bonhomme, which is the highest point of the TMB IP. I was still meeting a lot of people until the middle of the climb where crowds become smaller. I continued almost alone until the top of the climb where I overtook a young couple and I said "bonjour", as people usualy greet each other in French mountains. But instead of "bonjour" as a response I heard "ahoj"... "Did the woman say ahoj (which means hi in Czech)?" I thought. So I turned around and asked her: "Did you say ahoj?" which could look like I was offended. She was confused for a while but said yes. And then I switched to Czech and we had to laugh because none of us met any Czechs that day. We talked for a bit and while they were considering going to pitch the tent close to the hut, I still wanted to go a little bit higher to Col des Fours (2665 m a.s.l.) and then down to the valley towards La Ville des Glaciers where I wanted to stay overnight.

<!-- {% include gallery.html 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/35.jpg, After passing the highest point on the whole trail. The sky clear up and I could see the first view of massiv of Mont Blanc."
	%}-->

Right after passing through the saddle, I had a beautiful view of the mountains in the setting sun. And finally, for the first time during the day, I managed to see some glacier in the massive of Mont Blanc. When I started descending down, to much warmer valley bellow, I started looking for a spot where I could pitch my tarp. I wanted to do it as low as possible because I didn't want to be cold at night. As I got lower, I got to some cow fields and after my too-close-encounter with three bulls in New Zealand, I decided to not risk anything and make sure that I won't be sleeping at place where cows could visit me during the night. When I was almost at the bottom of the valley, where I saw some other tents, I was passing by the old abandonned barn. I checked if there was somewhere around and after not seeing anybody, I decided to try to open the door. It was stuck, so it was clear that the barn is definitely not used daily. The inside was empty and there even were no cow feaces! Yay! This place was almost screaming "please, stay here over night!", and so I did. 

After seeing one mouse running around and trying to see if I didn't drop some food, I was a little bit nervous because I didn't want to have mice running around the whole night. So I made safety precautions, hang all my stuf on the pipe in the middle of the barn and made a deal with the mice that it won't bully me during the night. And it worked! The night was good and so the next day I left some small piece of baguette for the little French mouse.

{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/33.jpg, Abandonned barn - ideal place for sleeping.;
			/assets/images/TMB/31.jpg, My luxurious bedroom on the first night.;
			assets/images/TMB/32.jpg, The view above the door from the abandonned barn - isn't it great?
			"%}

## Beware of wolfs

The night was good and after packing my stuff in the morning, I continued to the very bottom of the valley with a little settlement called La Ville des Glaciers, where I saw the first hikers that day. I did a quick bathroom break, because a flushing toilet  was a pleasant surprise and then I continued up to Col de la Seigne. Here I overtook literally a queue of tourists walking the TMB, who slept probably somewhere close to the bottom of the valley above which I woke up. As soon as I got to the top, there were almost nobody in sight ahead of me and I could enjoy the feeling of crossing the Italian border without too many people around. I took a few pictures and quickly went down to "bella Italia" because it was a bit windy up there and I started to be cold. 

{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/30.jpg, Morning views from the barn.;
			/assets/images/TMB/29.jpg, Last view to France before crossing to Italy.;
			/assets/images/TMB/28.jpg, Col de la Seigne - gateway to Italy.;
			/assets/images/TMB/24.jpg, The first kilometres in Italy."%}

I descended down to the valley where I saw some epic toilet, placed in the middle of this beautiful valley. I almost regreted that I didn't need to use it at that moment. At this moment, it was getting quite hot and I still needed to do one more climb before getting to Courmayer, which is something like the Italian version of Chamonix. The town is also at the base of Mt. Blanc and Courmayer ands Chamonix are connected by the tunnel that goes directly under the massive of Mt. Blanc. I was looking forward to getting to Courmayer because I wanted to have some lunch there and I also wanted to buy Cino - the Italian bitter sweet soda that I recently talked about with some friends and I really wanted to buy it. The climb before Courmayer was fine and I managed to tackle this 500 vertical meters pretty quickly. However, downhill was a real struggle. Not that it would be extremely difficult but I was really looking forward to getting to the town and the trail was quite slow (I should better say that I was slow, but it is easier to blame the trail and not myself, so I will keep it like that).

I finally for to Courmayer and I got to the first restaurant I saw and it was pizzeria. The pizza was huge, cheap and great, so it fulfilled all requirements I had at that moment. It helped me to recharge some needed energy and I was finally looking forward to hiking again. But before leaving the town, I had one more task. Cino! So I went to supermarket, but it was closed due to afternoon break. I checked other shops in the town but the situation was the same everywhere. However, I didn't want to feel like I've just hiked 70 kilometer from Chamonix for nothing, so I decided to wait almost one more hour, just to get this dreamed-about soda. When the shop opened, I could finally call "mission Cino" successful and I could continue in my journey arount the mountain.
			
{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/25.jpg, Marking that's hard to miss.;
			/assets/images/TMB/23.jpg, 💩=❤️;
			/assets/images/TMB/21.jpg, Approaching Courmayer.;
			/assets/images/TMB/19.jpg, Beware of stuntmen.;
			"%}

There was another long-ish climb from Courmayer to rifugio Bertone, but I was feeling great thanks to the pit-stop break in Courmayer. It was still quite hot, but the weather looked good otherwise, no thunderstorm in sight, so I couldn't complain and after getting to the end of the climb, I decided to take a little break and enjoy the views of Mt. Blanc and Col de la Seigne which I just passed in the morning. I love the feeling when I am in the mountains, I look into a distance and I see places which seem so far, but I know it only took me a few hours to get from there to where I am right now, using onyl my own feet, carying everything I need in my backpack. Not all the people who were around could say that, because I just met a huge group of hikers who did the Tour with a guide but they didn't carry their backpacks. Instead, they had a mule. The mule looked strong, but really stupid (sorry mule, no offence). It was trying to go somewhere all the time but the thing that managed to convince her to stay with the guide was a simple branch with a few green leaves that the guide was using as a bait and the mule was following. But if the mule wasn't stupid, I think it would feel as badass than me (and probably even more), because it carried really a lot of weight. 

After the encounter with a badass mule, I continued on a very nice single trail towards Challet Val Ferret close to which I wanted to pitch my tarp. I wasn't meeting any people except for the one biker, but otherwise I was alone in the beautiful view of Grandes Jorasses towering above the valley. I often walk in silence but sometimes it is nice to have a distraction, so I started listening to some podcasts. And when I was listening, and looking around, I suddenly stopped. I wasn't really sure what I am seeing in front of me, but it looked like wolf! Indeed, there was a wolf hiding behind the bushes about 70 meters ahed of me on the trail. It was looking at me and it wasn't moving anywhere. I've heard about wolfs in this part of the mountains but my first thought was that wolfs are really scared of people and they will run away. I was standing there, looking at the wolf, while the wolf was looking at me. I did a few steps forward but the wolf was still there and it didn't look like it is scared. In thins moment, I decided not to test how much the wolf is scared and because I started to be scared as well, I slowly walked back facing the wolf, and then I went to the bushes in the hill above the path. There was no other path, so my plan was to go uphill and pass the place where the wolf was standing. As I was scrambling upt the hill, the wolf continued on the path to the place where I was standing just a few minutes ago and it was looking at me. I quickly took a picture on my phone and since I had no other plans, I decided to continue forward, hoping that wolf will continue minding its own busines, which I was hoping is not me. I continued, the wolf went away but when I got back on the trail, I was still looking around if I see the wolf again. I didn't see the wolf anymore and got to Challet Val Feret just with the sunset. 

I pitched the ten in the nearby forest next to Dora di Ferret river, had a quick dinner and went to sleep. This was an interesting day!
			
{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/16.jpg, Wolf!!! (It is approximately in the middle of the image on the patch of grass next to the path).;
			/assets/images/TMB/15.jpg, No abandonned barn for the second night, so I built my tarp.
			"%}

## A big thunderstorm

The next morning, I packed my tarp and I was happy to leave this place because the daylight revealed that I am definitely not the first person sleeping there, which I could judge based on the amount of toilet paper hiding in the bushes around. I strated climbing to Grand Col Ferret, which is also the mountain pass where the trail enters Switzerland. I overtook many people who slept in the nearby hut and when I got at the top of the climb, I was again almost free of the crowds on the trail. I took some pictures with the Swiss-Italian border and I continued down to La Fouly.

No signs of wolfs (which was great) but very clear signs of incoming rain (that was not so great). Luckily the rain wasn't as dramatic as it originally seemed to be, so I could continue without problems. I was meeting people and continued at the bottom of the valley with a few small villages. As I started to climb up to Champex-Lac, I felt like I am flying. I could walk uphill quickly and I let my thoughts just flow freely, which is what I often do. And as I was thinking, I suddenly I realised there was an ongoing ultrarunning race called SwissPeaks 700k in the area. The race is brutal and covers 700 km, whith 48 vertical kilometers up and down and I was curious how is it going. This was really lucky thought, because I quickly watched a very recent vlog of one runner and I realised that ther's a huge thunderstorm coming in the area and the race was stopped for a few hours. I knew ther's probably going to be some rain in the evening, but I had no idea that it turned out to be this serious. With this important piece of information in my mind, I judged my situation and decided that I either have to wait in Champex-Lac until the other day (it was 3 pm), or I have get to Col de la Forclaz where I could find a shelter before the storm comes. 

{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/13.jpg, Close to the top of Grand Col Ferret.;
			/assets/images/TMB/09.jpg, Switzerland!;
			"%}

The option of waiting wasn't particularly tempting, so I decided to "sprint" over the following hill, get to Col de la Forclaz and ideally have dinner at the restaurant while the storm passes over. My timing was perfect! I don't know if it was my planning skills, or the fact that incoming storm was really motivating me to go faster. In the end, I was almost running some of the downills, which wouldn't be a big deal with fresh legs and light running vest, but this was almost after 120 km in the past three days with over 8 vertical kilometers in my legs and 10 kg backpack. The important thing was that I got to the restaurant right at the moment when a huge thunderstorm rolled in and I was so happy that I could eat some burger whill watching the hell outside. And while I was waiting at the restaurant, I bumped into one runner who was running the 400 km race as a part of the Swiss Peaks. He was waiting until the race was resumed, so I talked to him, which was really nice conversation. I waited until the thunderstorm passed and at about 10 p.m. I went to set up the tent to the dedicated camping spot next to the restaurant. I was falling asleep with the sound of cow bells from the nearby heard of cows and with occasional flashes of the headlamp from the runners running the Swiss Peaks.

{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/10.jpg, The Alps or Patagonia?;
			/assets/images/TMB/08.jpg, Running away from the incomming storm.;
			/assets/images/TMB/06.jpg, Thunderstorm going through Vallis - Martigny below me.
			"%}

## Closing the loop

I woke up and heard a gentle rain drumming on my tarp. I decide to stay in my sleeping bag for a bit longer and packed my tarp in a short window without the rain a little bit later. However, as soon as I started hiking, it began to rain again. It wasn't ideal, but I knew that I only have to do 28 km to close the loop today, so, in worst case scenarion, I would be walking in the rain just part of the day. The climb to Col de la Balme was all in the rain and when I got above the rain clouds, it was foggy, windy and temperature dropped down. This was a good motivation to go fast and get over the hill to La Tour quicker. At this moment, I was still feeling good in uphills but my quads and knees were suffering in downhills.

Luckily, the weather in La Tour cleared up and I only had one last climb ahead of me. I wasn't in rush because I had plenty of time, the weather was good and it was sunny with spectacular views of the Mt Blanc, Aguille Verte, Aiguille du Midi, Grandes Jorasses and many other famous peaks. When I was close to La Flegére, I sat next to the path and kept looking at the mountains around for a almost half an hour. Then I continued in the decent until I reached Chamonix where I started less than full four days ago. Since I was hungry, my first steps lead to Poco Loco burger place, where I got a great burger and I was enjoying this feeling of a little victory. 

I don't like concept of bucket list, because it is literally a list of things you would like to do before you die. It is too fatalistic for me. Instead, I have a list of things that I would like to do in my free time. It doesn't sound so cool as bucket list, but I think it reflects better my approach. And since Tour du Mt Blanc was on this list for a few years, I am happy that I can say I completed this famous loop and I got to know a new bit of bountains behing my doorstep.

{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/05.jpg, The last dy started with the rain. A view back to Trient from Col de Balme;
			/assets/images/TMB/04.jpg, A fog at top of Col de Balme.;
			/assets/images/TMB/03.jpg, Aiguillette d'Argentiere;
			/assets/images/TMB/02.jpg, Dramatic views.;
			/assets/images/TMB/01.jpg, Aiguille Verte and Grandes Jorasses peeking from the clouds.
			"%}

## Some numbers at the end

I am adding here the route I hiked and some numbers from my watch after I finished the loop.

**Route**: [https://mapy.com/s/cabasehuce](https://mapy.com/s/cabasehuce) <br>
**Total distance**: 162 km <br>
**Positive elevation gain**: +9800 m <br>
**Number of days**: 4 <br>
**Total moving time**: 38 hours <br>
**Fun on trails**: ∞ <br>



<!---
{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/11.jpg,Beautiful mountain;
			/assets/images/TMB/17.jpg,Beautiful mountain;
			/assets/images/TMB/18.jpg,Beautiful mountain; 
			/assets/images/TMB/16.jpg; 
			/assets/images/TMB/16.jpg; 
			/assets/images/TMB/12.jpg"%}

	{% include gallery.html 
	type="justified" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/12.jpg,Beautiful mountain"%}

{% include gallery.html  
	type="simple"
	images="/assets/images/TMB/13.jpg,Beautiful mountain;
			/assets/images/TMB/17.jpg,Beautiful mountain;
			/assets/images/TMB/22.jpg,Beautiful mountain; 
			/assets/images/TMB/16.jpg; 
			/assets/images/TMB/18.jpg; 
			/assets/images/TMB/12.jpg"%}

{% include gallery.html 
	type="grid" 
	images="/assets/images/TMB/14.jpg,Beautiful mountain;
			/assets/images/TMB/17.jpg,Beautiful mountain;
			/assets/images/TMB/18.jpg,Beautiful mountain; 
			/assets/images/TMB/16.jpg; 
			/assets/images/TMB/16.jpg; 
			/assets/images/TMB/12.jpg"%}
-->
