---
layout: post
title: What I Did to Be Ready for Te Araroa – And You Can Too
tags: hiking TeAraroa
image_preview: /assets/images/TA/ridge.jpeg
image_heading: /assets/images/TA/ridge.jpeg
---

It was the end of October 2024, I officially defended my [thesis](https://repository.cern/records/wp9p0-hkk75) titled "Searching for new physics using the ATLAS and FASER detectors" and became a doctor - *Yay!* Time to take a break and go for big adventures! Right after defending, I went with my friends climbing to Leonidio in Greece for ten days but I didn't plan anything for the trail. Te Araroa had been in my mind for the past 6 months but I didn't do any preparation since then. It was end of November and I still didn't plan anything. I am usually trying not to stress by things, but this was the moment when I realised that time is ticking and if I want to do the trail this season, I should better start planning because I should be standing in Bluff at the beginning of the trail in not more than two months! So I started some actual planning.

## The big planning... or not?

Speaking of physical preparation, I didn't do anything special because I am usually hiking and running all year long, so the fitness wasn't my concern. And even if I wasn't prepared physically, insuficcinet fitness is not something that could stop me from starting this adventure. But there were a few crucial things that could. And those were visas to New Zealand and flight tickets. I started to realise that I might be doing these things a bit late because getting visa could take a few weeks and it was just 3 weeks before Christmas, so I thought that things might take even longer. 

There are several types of visas and they can be requested through the [website](https://www.immigration.govt.nz/visas/?page=1) of New Zealand immigration department. They even have guide to help you pick the best visa option for you. The easiest to obtain are electronic visa for three months. The don't cost much, but I knew that three months won't be probably enough to finish the trail, so I was looking at other options. The second option was touristic visa for 6 months. They are more expensive but the problem is that you need to have a ticket outside of the country, or you need to provide a proof that you have sufficient funds to buy the ticket later. This would work for me, but it could take several weeks to get these and I didn't know what types of document they would require me to provide as a proof that I have enough money to buy the return ticket. If I did this earlier, I would be alright, but time was ticking not in my favour and there Christmas aproaching, which meant possible delays in communication. The third option as woring holiday visa. They are more expensive but I knew that I should be able to get them since there's a quota per country and year and Czech Republic didn't fill the quota and you don't need to have return ticket. So I requested working holiday visa and had them in my e-mail in about five days, which was much faster than they claimed. Unfortunatelly my name was not written correctly - viva la "ř"! They were specifically asking to write my name exactly as it is in my passport and that is Ondřej. However, the font they are using in visa form doesn't have "ř", so my name became Ondej. And that could be a problem. So I emailed visas office and I was prepared to wait for who knows how long, but I was surprised how quickly they reacted and I had new visa with my name correctly spelled (this time only as Ondrej) in just a few days.

Another reason for getting working holidays visa, even though my plan wasn't work, was that I didn't need to have a return ticket and I could have freedom in hiking the trail my own pace and buy the return ticket only when I am approching the end of the trail. Only later I learned that ther's a trick that one can do with cheaper touristic visa. You can buy the cheap flight ticket to Australia, for example, and cancel it as soon as you pass through the border control and then you can buy the new ticket for the way back when you know when you want to return. 

Buying the flight tickets was starightforward. I didn't have many options because I wanted to fly in the second half of January and so there were not really extra cheap tickets which one can find if he's buying tickets in advance and also maybe not in the time close to New Year. The plan was following. Take the flight from Paris on January 22, 2024. Go to Aucklad where I will stay for six days and will plan some logistics, namely resupply boxes for the sections of the trail where it's hard to buy some food. 

Even though resupply boxes are not necessary, there are sections where they can be useful. There's plenty of information on the web about this topic, so I won't write details but I decided to send two boxes to the trail - one to Arthur's pass village, and the other one to St. Arnaud.

I also needed to buy some new gear which I didn't have from my previous adventures but I will talk about my gear in the next [post]({{ '/2025/08/30/TA_gear_list.html' | relative_url }}).

## Navigation and how (not) to get lost?

Trail is marked but not the marking isn't everywhere. Some people might disagree but I think it's marked well in a sense that potentially tricky and problematic sections have *usually* good marking. But going without the map would be very difficult. I don't say impossible, because I met a couple on the trail who decided to go completely offline and without phones and even without maps, but when I heard their stories about crazy bush whacking, I don't think it is the way to go. Because there will be crazy bushwhacking even with the navigation and maps! Ther's also one catch. All trails in New Zealand use the same marking, which is usually orange triangle, so if two trails cross each other, you really should know where you are going because you might end up following wrong orange triangles. You wouldn't be the first one who did some bonus miles, but it's more convenient if you can avoid that.

The official route (which can slightly change every year due to some closures, or opening of the new trail sections) is marked in the official Te Araroa [trail app](https://www.teararoa.org.nz/the-trail-app/) which is for free. It has trail notes about the directions, but I preferred another app, which is [FarOut](https://faroutguides.com/). It is the app with guides for various long thru hikes, including famous PCT and many others. The app is free but the guides have to be purchased. I think it is good investment though. I met people hiking without FarOut, so it is not necessary, but I found it super useful because it shows not only the trail but also water sources, shops, accommodations and people can write comments under individual waypoints, so you can have up to date information about huts, or quality of water in various water sources. Different types of wapoints (shops, water, huts,...) have different colours, so it is easy to see, for example, where the next shop for ressuoply is and that saves a lot of time because you can easily see how long the section, for which you need to buy food, is. 

I was also using my all-time favourite map app [Mapy.cz](https://mapy.com/en/turisticka?mobilepromo=1&x=11.3817622&y=48.5563849&z=7) (now Mapy.com), which is for free, without advertisements, you can download maps to offline and you can do offline route planning. The way how I mostly used this app was to create .gpx track for the next section of the trail which I then sent to my Garmin watch which support navigation. Using navigation in the watch is my ultimate hack. You need to charge the watch every day, but the capacity of their battery is about 1/8 of the one in the phone. So if you can charge your phone 4 times from your powerbank, you can charge your watch 32 times - meaning that you can navigate the whole month using only your watch, while you can save the battery in your phone for emergency situations, or for pictures. I used navigation from the watch in all my previous big adventures and it works even if you only have the line and no map! I think that navigation in watch is one of the most underrated features that many sport watch have.


## What else?

Unlike some famous long trail in Americe, there is no permit necessary for hiking Te Araroa. But it might be useful to buy the [trail pass](https://www.teararoa.org.nz/the-trail-pass/) which allows you to sleep in the huts. You can hike it without the pass if you don't intend to stay in huts, or you can buy individual tickets for the huts, but the trail pass makes is generally cheaper and also easier because you don't need to wory about the tickets. There are only a few huts on the trail (mainly in Nelson Lakes as far as I remebmer) where you still need to pay for some huts but the trail pass gives some discount. You will be also asked to donate to Te Araroa trust to support the trail maintainance but that's not mandatory.


## Other useful resources

There are plenty of resources on the web but some of them taht I founf particularly useful were:

* [**Official Te Araroa website**](https://www.teararoa.org.nz/) is the most reliable source of information, even though there might be things you won't be able to find there.
* [**Te Araroa Facebook group**](https://www.facebook.com/groups/26638669574) where you can ask people and you can search in previous posts becuase you are very likely not the first one dealing with given issue. There was also dedicated group for given hiking season where you can contact people hiking the trail in the same season as you.
* [**Trail angels Facebook group**](https://www.facebook.com/groups/157838391506149) is the very useful group that I discovered thanks to other fellow hiker only towards the end of the trail. Trail angels are the people helping hikers on the trail. They are mostly offering place to stay over night for some little contribution (or for free, but some little tip, *koha*, is always appreciated). The help of trail angels is especially useful in the North Island where it's sometimes hard to wild camp.
* [**TA NOBO guide**](https://teararoanobo.net/) can be particularly useful if you are hiking NOBO like me because most of the resources are written for SOBO hikers and it's pain to read the trail notes from bottom to the top. This page also contains a lot of useful informations.
* **WhatsApp group**. When you start hiking, you can ask in the Facebook group or people you meet on the trail if you can be added to the WhatsApp group. I almost never used the group but it is always good to be there in case you need to ask quickly.

If you are interested in my gear list, you can continue reading the next [post]({{ '/TA_gear_list' | relative_url }}).


